# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS


This project marks the culmination of a multiyear, multicity endeavor that commenced in earnest during graduate school, found its  rst stable expression in a dissertation, and has, over a decade later, fully realized it- self with this book. During this long period, over the various stages of this project, many people have left their mark in so many countless ways. Their support, interventions, comments, and presence have not only improved the quality of this work but also simply made it possible. This book could not have been written without all of you, and for that I am deeply grateful.

In 1996, at the time of my  rst exposure to Linux, I was unable to glean its signi cance. I could not comprehend why a friend was so enthused to have received a CD in the mail equipped with Slackware, a Linux distri- bution. To be frank, my friend’s excitement about software was not only incomprehensible; it also was puzzling. Thankfully about a year later, this person clued me in as to what makes this world extraordinary, doing so initially via my interest at the time: intellectual property law. If it were not for Patrick Crosby, who literally sat me down one day in 1997 to describe the existence of a novel licensing agreement, the GNU General Public License (GPL), I would have likely never embarked on the study of free software and eventually hackers. I am thrilled he decided that some- thing dear to him would be of interest to me. And it was. I was  oored to discover working alternatives to existing intellectual property instruments. After months of spending hour after hour online, week after week, read- ing about the  urry of exciting developments reported on Linux Weekly News, Kuro5hin, and Slashdot, it became clear to me that much more than the law was compelling about this world, and that I should turn this distractingly fascinating hobby into my dissertation topic or run the risk of never  nishing graduate school. Now I not only know why Patrick was happy to have received the Slackware CD back in 1996—and I found he was not alone, because many people have told me about the joy of discov- ering Slackware—but also hope I can convey this passion for technology to others in the pages of this book.

Many moons ago in graduate school at the University of Chicago when I proposed switching projects, my advisers supported my heretical decision, although some warned me that I would have trouble landing a job in an anthropology department (they were right). Members of my dissertation committee have given invaluable insight and support. My cochairs, Jean Comaroff and John Kelly, elongated my project in the sense that they always asked me to think historically. Jean has also inspired me in so many ways, then and now. She is everything a scholar should be, so I thank her for be- ing such a great mentor. Nadia Abu El-Haj encouraged me to examine the sociocultural mechanisms by which technoscience can act as the basis for broader societal transformation. I was extremely fortunate to have Gary Downey and Chris Kelty on board. In 1999, I was inspired by a talk that Gary gave at the American Anthropological Association meetings on the importance of positive critique, and I hope to have contributed to such a project here.

Chris, a geek anthropologist extraordinaire, has added to this project in innumerable ways. Because of his stellar work on free software, his com- ments have been breathlessly on target, and more than any other person, he has pushed this project to  rmer, more coherent ground. His insistence on not only understanding the world but also (re)shaping it is inspiring, and I hope that I can one day follow in his footsteps. Although Patrice Riemens was not an of cial adviser, he nonetheless, like any hacker would, shared freely. His advice, especially pertaining to hacker politics, was as indispens- able as the guidance from my of cial committee members.

Fieldwork, of course, is where the bulk of anthropological research oc- curs. For me, most of that took place in San Francisco, with a short stint in the Netherlands, and throughout copious time was spent online. While there were countless people who made my  eldwork possible, I have to single out three who really went out on a limb for me, over and over again: Seth Schoen, Praveen Sinha, and Zack Brown. I think each one of you knows how much you have helped me start, proceed with, and  nish this project, and I am grateful from the bottom of my heart.

Many others have helped me understand with much greater depth what drives people to write free and open-source software (F/OSS). Among those in the Bay Area, I would like to especially thank Brian Behlendorf, Rick Moen, Karsten Self, Don Marti, Mike Higashi, and Evan Prodromou. Also, all the folks at the Electronic Frontier Foundation and Online Policy Group provided me with the invaluable opportunity of interning at their respec- tive organizations. Will Doherty, in particular, deserves a special nod (even though he worked me so hard). Quan Yin also gave me the opportunity to volunteer at its acupuncture clinic, and perhaps more than any other experi- ence, this one kept everything in place and perspective. My Bay Area room- mates, Linda Graham and Nikki Ford, supplied me with an endless stream of support.

My time in the Netherlands, in October 2002, was short but made a lasting impression. The Hippies from Hell were welcoming and helpful. They also organize the best darn hacker conferences in the world, and a big thanks to them (and all the other volunteers) for putting in so much effort to ensure that others can have an amazing time. Niels Hatzmann was a gra- cious host, great biking partner, and now good friend.

A bulk of my work was with Debian and its developers. I can’t thank these developers enough. Words can’t capture how much I admire the ways in which you have managed to not only produce an operating system (OS) but also a stunningly vibrant online community—a word I rarely use for the Internet, and yet one that absolutely pertains to the case of Debian. I have thoroughly enjoyed my time with everyone as well, whether in person; on Internet Relay Chat (IRC), where countless folks have helped me answer questions and get through the many stages of writing and editing; and most especially, at the various Debconfs I have attended from Edinburgh to Porto Alegre. And after helping to organize Debconf10 in New York City, I was able to fully experience the unmistakable pride that swells when a collec- tive works to conjure something into being. I am deeply grateful for the opportunity to have participated and look forward to attending many more in future times.

Though there are many developers who have taken the time to share their thoughts about Debian and other F/OSS projects, Benjamin “mako” Hill, in particular, has been a close friend and collaborator. I wish him well as he embarks on his own academic career and look forward to future col- laborations. Martin Kraft, Clint Adams, Paul Wise, “vagrant,” Joey Hess, Erinn Clark, and Daniel Khan Gilmore have also been great friends as well as teachers over this journey.

I returned to the University of Chicago in fall 2003 to write my disser- tation, only to discover that really I had no idea how to proceed. Thank- fully there were many others to teach me the ropes. An astounding range of people read different parts of my dissertation and gave me helpful feedback. There are a few who went beyond the call of duty, though. Alex “rex” Gol- ub, who taught me more about liberalism than anyone else, really pushed me to think more systematically than I was used to at the time. Alex Choby has always been a steadfast long-distance interlocutor and also went for the extra mile to offer comments on my work on cleverness. James Rizzo was a fantastic editor with equally fantastic comments. Joe Hankins, Joe Fein- berg, Jeff Martin, Andrea Muehlebach, Jessica Greenberg, Yarimar Bonilla, and Chris Walker also gave me copious feedback on this project. One of the reasons I have come to respect the University of Chicago is because of its student-run graduate workshops. I was known to make my rounds at various workshops, and the following students gave me great feedback throughout the last few years: Anya Bernsetin, Stephen Scott, Mike Cepek, Andrew Dilts. Alex Mawyer, Mihir Pandya, Anwen Tormey, Jason McGraw, Diana Bocarejo, and Tom Asher (and others who I don’t know personally or may have forgotten). Many other professors in and out of the workshop system also read a few of the chapters and offered feedback, especially Tan- ya Luhrmann and Patchen Markell, who provided excellent advice on vari- ous chapters. Susan Gal, Manuela Carneiro Da Cunha, Michael Silverstein, Jessica Cattelinno, Joe Masco, and Judith Farquar at different points also read portions and provided helpful suggestions.

The dissertation formed the bulk of what became this book, which was written in diverse places and weather climates, from scorching summers in San Juan, Puerto Rico, to one of the coldest North American cities, Edmon- ton, Canada. While a postdoctoral fellow at the Center for Cultural Analysis at Rutgers University, I received useful comments from Meredith McGill, Michael Warner, Greg Lastowka, Paula McDowell, Ellen Goodman, Daniel Fisher, and especially Lisa Gitelman, and was also afforded a lively context from which to learn about intellectual property law from the angle of book history. At the University of Alberta, Rob Wilson, Kathleen Lowery, and my of ce mate Jeff Kochan also read various sections and chapters of the book. I  nished a good chunk of the book thanks to the support (and amaz- ing peace and quiet) provided by the Institute for Advanced Study. I would like to especially thank Didier Fassin and Tanya Erzen, whose insights have made their way into this book.

There are a few people who also have given important feedback on por- tions of this book, presented at conferences or other venues: Jelena Kara- novic, Kathy Mancuso, Andrew Leonard, Nanodust, Martin Langhoff, Bill Sterner, Margot Browning, Jonas Smedegaard, Danny O’Brien, Cory Docto- row, Graham Jones, Thomas, Malaby, Alan Toner, Samir Chopra, Scott Dex- ter, Jonah Bossewitch, Marc Perlman, and Patrick Davison. Quinn Norton, whose expansive creativity and deep insight into all things geek aided me in toning down the academese, supplied great nuggets of wisdom and insight. Mary Murrell was kind enough to read the entire manuscript, and provide substantive insight and feedback on my arguments and the book’s structure. I am so fortunate that I was able to teach material related to this topic and, especially, to such engaged students (and offer a hat tip to Parker Higgins, Max Salzberg, and Kevin Gotkin, in particular). Everyone in my “home away from home,” #techfed, provided me with essential support through- out this process—humor—and many also offered their suggestions. Even if IRC has been known to draw my attention from writing, I could not have  nished this book without it.

Two of my closest friends are everywhere in this book. Genevieve Lakier, the brightest woman I know, has read much of this book and pushed my thinking forward. Karl Fogel, an open-source developer and open access advocate, is not only featured in the pages of this book but read through many sections and chapters as well to make sure that my language, and thus arguments, were more precise.

For my  rst academic teaching position, I had the amazing fortune of landing at the Department of Media, Culture, and Communication at New York University—fortunate for the collegiality, commitment to excellence, and resources provided to junior faculty. I would like to thank my two chairs, Ted Magder and Marita Sturken, who went to bat for me many times, making New York University such a hospitable home from which to work. My New York University colleague Michael Ralph was one of the most engaging sounding boards, providing invaluable feedback espe- cially on the question of cunning and craft among hackers. My research assistants, James Hodges, Parker Higgins, and especially Matthew Powers, helped enormously with making this book happen.

Various organizations provided me with generous funding, which has been essential for carrying out this research and writing. I graciously ac- knowledge support from the National Science Foundation Grant for a dis- sertation research grant, the Social Science Research Council for a research grant for the study of nonpro ts, and the Woodrow Wilson National Fel- lowship Foundation’s Charlotte W. Newcombe Doctoral Dissertation Fel- lowship for the study of religious and ethical values.

Parts of this book have also been published elsewhere, and have bene ted tremendously from the anonymous reviewers and journal editors. The last section in chapter 1 was published as “Hacking in Person: The Ritual Char- acter of Conferences and the Distillation of a Lifeworld,” Anthropological Quarterly 83 (1): 47–72. An earlier version of chapter 5 was published as “Code Is Speech: Legal Tinkering, Expertise, and Protest among Free and Open-Source Software Developers,” Cultural Anthropology 24 (3): 420–54. Sections of the conclusion can be found in “The Political Agnosticism of Free and Open-Source Software and the Inadvertent Politics of Contrast,” Anthropology Quarterly 77 (3): 507–19.

I am extraordinarily fortunate that my book landed with Princeton Uni- versity Press and Fred Appel. Fred has been such a lively editor and adviser, and I have so enjoyed our many chats over coffee and drinks, and look forward to many more in the future. To the anonymous reviewers: thank you for the kindness, generosity, and  nely tuned comments that have been essential to completing this book.

One person has had the opportunity to see me through every last step of brainstorming, drafting, writing, rewriting, and complaining: Micah Ander- son. For better and worse, he has experienced the public and private face of this project, graciously showering the pages with perceptive, lively, and espe- cially humorous comments and edits on every last page, all the while provid- ing steadfast support as we tromped from city to city under conditions that were for so many years often challenging. My gratitude is beyond words.

Finally, my family and adopted family have been an important source of strength. The Andersons were so patient and supportive as I hopped around cities all over North America, unable to see them as I spent so much time with my mother. My father has always placed great value on education, sac- ri cing many years of retirement so I could get a college education. In 2004, my sister made a signi cant sacri ce, moving in with my mother to take care of her, so I could  nish my dissertation. From 2002–2010, my mother suffered a cruel illness that robbed her of her mind and soul. During those eight years, I traveled back and forth from wherever I was living to San Juan in order to be by her side. It was not always easy to live in a state of in-betweenness, in between cities, in between life and death, but I would not have had it any other way. Even though my mother is the one person close to me who will never be able to read any of this book, she made it possible in so many ways; I dedicate this book to my mother, Vera.

