# CHAPTER 4
## Two Ethical Moments in Debian
••

F/OSS projects largely take place on the Internet. Varying in size from a couple of developers to a network of over one thousand, they are sites where programmers coordinate and produce high-quality software. A growing body of literature has addressed questions of developer motivation (Raymond 1999), project structures, and changing implications for software development along with factors that lead to success and failures in projects (Crowston and Howison 2005; O’Mahony and Ferraro 2007; Schweik and English 2012), open-source legality (McGowan 2001; Vetter 2004, 2007), utilitarian and rational choice incentive structures (Gallaway and Kinnear 2004; Lancashire 2001; von Hippel and von Krogh 2003), the economics of open-source software (Lerner and Tirole 2001; Lerner and Schankerman 2010; von Hippel 2005), and the noneconomic incentive mechanisms, cul- tural norms, and broader sociopolitical implications of F/OSS production (Benkler 2006; Berry 2008; Chopra and Dexter 2007; Ghosh 1998; Hi- manen 2001; Kelty 2008; Kollock 1999; Lessig 1999; Weber 2004).

Although a number of these studies tangentially discuss ethical questions (e.g., con ict resolution within F/OSS projects), they rarely address how de- velopers commit themselves to an ethical vision through, rather than prior to, their participation in a F/OSS project. Much of the F/OSS literature, in other words, is heavily focused on the question of motivation or incentive mechanisms, and often fails to account for the plasticity of human motiva- tions and ethical perceptions.

Many of these authors acknowledge the importance of shared norms, and usually address this by referring to or quoting the famous passage in Levy’s Hackers where he de nes the tenets of the hacker ethic. In a general sense, these principles still powerfully capture the spirit of ethical commitments. Nevertheless, by leaning so heavily on Levy, what we miss is how these precepts take actual form and how they change over time. The literature, crucially, has tended to ignore how hacker commitments are transformed by the lived experiences that unfold within F/OSS projects.1

This chapter uses the Debian project to demonstrate how free software development is not simply a technical endeavor but also a moral one. The analysis is informed by the work of the legal theorist Robert Cover, who examines the ways that “jurisgenesis,” the production and stabilization of inhabited normative meanings, requires an ongoing and sometimes con ict- ing interpretation of codi ed textual norms. “Some small and private, others immense and public,” these continual acts of reinterpretation and commit- ment establish what Cover (1993, 95) calls a nomos:

> We inhabit a nomos—a normative universe. We constantly create and maintain a world of right and wrong, of lawful and unlawful. [ . . . ] No set of legal institutions or prescriptions exists apart from the nar- ratives that locate it and give it meaning. For every constitution there is an epic, for each decalogue a scripture. Once understood in the con- text of the narratives that give it meaning, law becomes not merely a system of rules to be observed, but a world in which we live.

As Debian has organizationally matured, it has also concurrently devel- oped along legal and ethical lines, codifying key principles in two related documents: the Social Contract and DFSG. Developers continually draw on these texts to craft a dense ethical practice that sustains itself primarily via ongoing acts of narrative interpretation.

While the idea of nomos provides a useful general framework for under- standing how ethical stances are codi ed and internalized, for my purposes here, I specify its meaning by distinguishing among a repertoire of every- day micropractices that I group under two distinct (and contrasting) ethical moments: enculturation and punctuated crisis. While in practice these two moments exist in a far more complicated mixture and copresence, here they are separated for the sake of clarity and analytic value. Each one tells us a slightly different story about how people use narrative to adopt values, and then animate and transform them over time.

By ethical enculturation, I refer to a process of relatively con ict-free socialization. Among developers, this includes learning the tacit and explicit knowledge (including technical, moral, or procedural knowledge) needed to effectively interact with other project members as well as acquiring trust, learning appropriate social behavior, and establishing best practices. Al- though ethical enculturation is ongoing and distributed, the most pertinent instance of it in the Debian project is the New Maintainer Process (NMP)— the procedure of mentorship and testing through which prospective devel- opers apply for and gain membership in Debian. Ful lling the mandates of the NMP is not a matter of a few days of  lling out forms. It can take months of hard work. A prospective developer has to  nd a sponsor and advocate, learn the complicated workings of Debian policy and its techni- cal infrastructure, successfully package a piece of software that satis es a set of technical standards, and meet at least one other Debian developer in person for identity veri cation. This period of mentorship, pedagogy, and testing ensures that developers enter with a common denominator of technical, legal, and philosophical knowledge, and hence become trusted collective members.

The other moment I investigate is crisis. As the number of developers in the Debian project has grown from one dozen to over one thousand, punc- tuated crises routinely emerge around particularly contested issues: matters of project transparency, internal and external communication, membership size, the nature of authority within the project, and the scope and limits of software licenses. Many of these crises have an acute phase (usually spurred by a provocative action or statement) in which debate erupts on several media all at once: mailing lists, IRCs, and blog entries. While the debate dur- ing these periods can be congenial, measured, rational, and sometimes even peppered liberally with jokes, its tone can also be passionate, uncharitable, and sometimes downright vicious.

During these times, we  nd that while developers may share a common ethical ground, they often disagree about the implementation of its prin- ciples. Though the content of these debates certainly matters (and will be discussed to some extent), my primary focus is on the productive affective stance induced by these crises. I argue that these are instances of assessment, in which people turn their attentive, ethical beings toward an unfolding situ- ation and engage in dif cult questions. In this mode, passions are animated while values are challenged and sometimes reformulated. Although these debates sometimes result in project stasis, demoralization, or exodus, they can produce a heightened and productive ethical orientation among devel- opers. Crises can be evaluated as moments of ethical production in terms of not only their functional outcomes but also their ability to move people to re exively articulate their ideals. Such dialogic, con icted debate re ects the active engagement of participants who renew and occasionally alter their ethical commitments. As such, crises can be vital to establishing and reestab- lishing the importance of normative precepts.

The main purpose of this chapter is to explicate how different instances of ethical labor de ne the cohesive yet nonunitary moral commitments that developers hold toward Debian and its philosophy of freedom. It is neces- sary to  rst brie y introduce Debian’s history and structure.

Thus, much of what is described in this part of the chapter is Debian’s historical transition from an informal group (organized largely around char- ismatic leadership, personal relationships, and ad hoc decision making) to a stable institution. Most F/OSS projects in their infancy, including Debian, operate without formal procedures of governance and instead are guided by the technical judgments of a small group of participants. This informal tech- nocracy is captured in a famous pronouncement by a hacker pioneer, David Clark, who helped develop the early protocols of the Internet: “We reject: kings, presidents and voting. We believe in: rough consensus and running code” (quoted in Hoffman 2011).2 Even though an ideal of rough consen- sus still exists in Debian today, Debian developers have had to demarcate membership criteria, explicitly de ne roles, and implement a complicated voting protocol in order to successfully grow.

Although charismatic leadership, improvised actions, and informal rela- tionships still exist in the project today, these have been supplemented by other modes of formal governance. Through Debian’s tremendous growth, developers have cobbled together a hybrid organizational structure that in- tegrates three different modes of governance—democratic majoritarian rule, a guildlike meritocracy, and an ad hoc process of rough consensus. It is unsurprising, then, that many of Debian’s crises result from con icts arising from differences in these three models. What I want to emphasize is how responses to these crises often clarify the purposes and limits of each mode of interaction.

Democratic voting reveals Debian’s populist face; it is an acknowledg- ment that each developer is a valuable contributor to the project and de- serves an equal say in its future. Yet democracy and especially majoritarian voting is frequently viewed as an ineffective, improper method for resolving technical matters, because the mediocrity of the majority can overrule the “right” technical decisions. For this reason, developers are notably com- mitted to an open-ended process of argumentation, where vigorous debate, conducted over mailing lists, bug reports, and IRC channels, ideally clari es the right solution and leads to enough rough consensus to proceed. In this mode, everyone is treated as an equal subject with the potential to convince others of the merit or demerit of a given technical solution, regardless of their status in the project.

This approach af rms two long-standing liberal dispositions. First, it displays the value placed on speech and debate in determining a nonpar- tisan resolution to collective problems, theorized, say, in the work of Jür- gen Habermas (1981). This commitment also exhibits the preference that Debian developers hold for individually generated decision making in lieu of top-down regulation or management. These tendencies are not unique to Debian developers, though. For instance, Thomas Malaby (2009, 60) de- scribes the mistrust of the hierarchical management that he routinely wit- nessed among the programmer employees of Linden Lab, makers of Second Life, which he portrays as a “politically charged disposition, one that tended to treat top-down or vertical decision making as the antithesis of empow- ered and creative action.”3

However skeptical Debian hackers are of rigid, top-down authority, their system of equal opportunity nonetheless leads to some established modes and nodes of authority, and thus is also the basis for the hierarchies that inhere in meritocracies. Individual developers who over time come to dem- onstrate their technical worth through a combination of ability and dedica- tion eventually obtain the status of a trusted technical guardian. As such, a meritocratic system arises that vests power in roles, such as delegates and various technical “masters” who hold power for unspeci ed periods of time.

As the very names of their roles suggest, guardians are not unlike the guild masters of times past who held the trust and respect of other guild members because of their wisdom, experience, and mastery of the craft.

If democratic rule is sometimes treated with overt suspicion and dislike, there is a far more subtle fear concerning the importance of meritocracy and the meritocrats it produces—namely, the fear of corruption. Speci cally, there is discomfort with the idea that the technical guardians could (as they are vested to do) exercise their authority without consulting the project as a whole, thereby foreclosing precisely the neutral, technical debate that al- lowed them to gain their authority in the  rst place. Debian developers at times express their unease about the fact that delegates have the legitimate power to make decisions without consulting other developers. This anxiety is voiced indirectly through the humorous phrase “There is no cabal.” It is manifested more critically when developers in positions of authority are seen to violate what I call “meritocratic trust”—the expectation that en- trusted guardians act in good technical faith and not for personal interest.

The building of trust and novel organizational procedures has been cen- tral to the organizational growth of Debian as well as balancing its gover- nance modes. These themes are recurrent in science and technology studies. Whether expressed through the trustworthiness of a noble character, as was the case in seventeenth-century British scienti c enterprise (Shapin 1994), or the transformation of books into transparent and vetted objects of truthful knowledge (Johns 1998), trust has been essential to bringing coherence, or- der, and stability to emergent social institutions, objects, and technical prac- tices. Within F/OSS projects, issues of trust are no less pressing (Kelty 2005). Questions of who and what to trust—whether delegates, voting procedures, a piece of code, a license, or a guideline—are central to the repertoire of ethi- cal practices that are the primary focus of this chapter.4

-----------------------------------------
## DEBIAN AND ITS SOCIAL ORGANIZATION

Debian is a project, made up of just over a thousand volunteers at the time of this writing, that creates and distributes a Linux-based OS composed of thousands of individual software applications. As is the case with most mid- to large-size projects (i.e., those with over a couple of hundred developers), Debian is extraordinarily complex and has undergone considerable changes over the course of its history. In its nascency, Debian was run on an informal basis; it had fewer than two-dozen developers, who communicated primar- ily through a single email list. Excitement, passion, and experimentation drove the project’s early development. In order to accommodate technical and human growth, however, signi cant changes in its policy, procedures, and structure occurred between 1997 and 1999. Now Debian boasts an intricate hybrid political system, a developer IRC, a formalized membership entry procedure (the NMP), and a set of charters that includes the Constitu- tion, Social Contract, and Debian Free Software Guidelines (DFSG). Debian has produced detailed policy and technical manuals; controls development, testing, and mirroring machines located around the world; and manages bug-tracking and collaborative software. The project also publishes a news- letter, hosts a group blog, and organizes an annual conference.

The bulk of the volunteer work for Debian has always consisted of soft- ware packaging—the systematic compartmentalization, customization, and standardization of existing software into one system. (In local lingo, Debian is referred to as a distribution, the unit of software is called a package, and de- velopers are often referred to as package maintainers.) Taken together, these packages constitute the Debian Linux distribution. Along with the package maintainers, teams of Debian developers support infrastructure and develop Debian-speci c software, while others write documentation or translate doc- umentation into various languages. Each Debian developer has at least one piece of software (and usually several) packages that they maintain.

Much of the work on Debian happens in an independent, parallel, dis- tributed fashion through informal collaboration on IRC channels or mail- ing lists, where developers ask for and receive help.5 Some collaboration is mediated by bug reports. Written by Debian developers or users, bug reports are  led on a publicly viewable bug-tracking system. Incoming reports can identify a technical problem with a piece of software and provide crucial details; they sometimes even supply the solution in the form of code to be incorporated as a patch.

While a maintainer holds no legal ownership of the software they pack- age, Debian’s norms of civility dictate that within the boundaries of the Debian project, it is their responsibility alone. The assumption that main- tainers enjoy near-absolute control over their software package means that alterations should not take place without their explicit permission. If modi cations are needed to eliminate a release-critical bug or  x a secu- rity problem, though, there is a socially accepted protocol for doing so: the Non-Maintainer Upload (NMU). This mechanism is designed to allow a nonmaintainer to upload a package in order to  x critical bugs, or com- pensate for a busy or missing maintainer. While many developers appreci- ate contributions provided by an NMU, seeing it as a handy mechanism to encourage coparticipation, others  nd the protocol annoying or even downright obnoxious insofar as it allows inexperienced developers to insert shoddy solutions into their software. Other developers view it in a slightly different light: as a means of exposing poor work. As one developer on IRC told me half jokingly, an NMU reveals “our laundry for public inspection.”

If much of the project’s work occurs through individualized but parallel efforts, work assumes a more collaborative and populist tone during the period before the release of a new Debian version: bug-squashing parties are held more regularly, and developers work round-the-clock on an IRC channel to resolve what have been identi ed as “release critical bugs” in the bug-tracking software. During this period, which can last anywhere from a few months to over a year, Debian’s release managers sanction NMUs with much less stringent criteria, and they are correspondingly more frequent.6

Among the hacker and F/OSS publics, Debian’s fame rests on four developments—two technical and two social. Technically, Debian is one of the best-equipped distributions, offering more than twenty- ve thousand individ- ual pieces of software, all with DFSG-approved licenses. Debian, relatedly, can currently run on eleven hardware architectures—more than any other Linux distribution. This is one of the reasons it has earned the title of the “Universal OS.” On the social side, Debian holds the distinction of having more individual members than any F/OSS project. It is also known for its strong commitment to the ethical principles of free software, as elaborated in two key documents— the Social Contract and DFSG. These documents  gure prominently in the NMP I discuss below. They are also the foundational texts that orient the proj- ect’s sense of identity. Now let’s take a closer look at the Debian charters and governing structures that have emerged in the last decade.

-----------------------------------------
## SOCIAL CHARTERS AND GOVERNANCE

Dissatis ed with the then-existing distribution and inspired by the Linux kernel project, Murdock founded the Debian project in August 1993. He attracted a group of volunteers, who began to design a package manage- ment system that could integrate the contributions of every single devel- oper who chose to maintain the package. I emphasize this point because it marked an important shift in the history of the Unix collaborative ethical temperament—one that explicitly honored transparency, accessibility, and openness for the purpose of facilitating as well as encouraging participation. It represented a new historical chapter in how hackers conceived of and implemented meritocracy.

One longtime Debian developer, who came of age as a hacker well before the Linux era, powerfully captured the spirit of this change in a short com- ment he made during a Debian history roundtable at the Debian annual conference. He described how collaboration on Unix proceeded before the Linux era, at the University of California at Berkeley (and other locations) where the Berkeley Unix distribution was partially developed:

> There was a process by which you wrote some code and submitted in the “I-am-not-worthy but I-hope-that-this-will-be-of-use-to-you supplication mode” to Berkeley, and if they kinda looked at it and thought, “Oh, this is cool,” then it would make it in, and if they said, “Interesting idea, but there is a better way to do that,” they might write a different implementation of it.

While the Berkeley Unix gurus accepted contributions from those who were not already participating on the project, it was dif cult to pierce the inner circle of authority and become an actual team member. This, from the point of view of the developers participating in the roundtable, produced an unacceptable form of project participation, characterized by a degraded elitism that failed to equalize the terrain on which develop- ers could prove their worth. As I argued earlier, the F/OSS hacker system of meritocracy compels individuals to release the fruits of their labor in order to constantly equalize the conditions for production, so that oth- ers can also engage in the lifelong project of technical self-cultivation within a community of peers. When Torvalds and Murdock developed their own projects (the Linux kernel and Debian, respectively), they did things differently than the earlier cadre of Unix hackers by fostering a more egalitarian environment of openness and transparency. Participa- tion was encouraged, and recognition was given where it was due. Ac- cepting more contributions was also, of course, seen as a way to improve and encourage technical ef ciency.

Murdock, who took on a great deal of the early work on Debian, acted as the project’s leader. Debian in this sense was not unusual. Many of the early free software projects worked and still work along this logic of informal leadership by extension of a work ethic charisma (O’Neil 2009). Authority and respect is established through the sheer amount of work one puts into the project; participants in return offer their loyalty to it. But what crucially distinguished Debian from earlier collaborative efforts was that everyone who technically contributed to the project could potentially become a mem- ber. By 1995, there was a software package system in place that harnessed the power of individuality to produce a distribution that far exceeded the contributions of any single person.

In 1996, Debian grew in size to 120 developers and released a version of the OS that contained about 800 packages. Around this time, Murdock passed on the reins of leadership to Perens, who along with a handful of other developers, became responsible for the bulk of the project’s technical work. Perens, already famous in the geek public sphere for both his pas- sionate commitment to the principles of free software and desire to make free software more visible in the business sector, had a marked impact on the organization of Debian, in ways recalled as both positive and negative.7 Perhaps most signi cant for my purposes here, Perens helped coordinate the drafting of the Social Contract and DFSG, which were  rst suggested by Schuessler.

The genesis of the Social Contract is worth brie y recounting, for it reveals the explicit sense of responsibility and accountability to a larger commonwealth of users and developers that has characterized the project since its inception (when Murdock  rst articulated these values in “The Debian Manifesto”). Schuessler proposed the idea for the Social Contract after a conversation at a conference with Bob Young, the cofounder of a then-emergent commercial Linux distribution, Red Hat. When Schuessler suggested that Red Hat might want to guarantee in writing that as it grew larger, it would always provide GPL software, Young replied, “that would be the kiss of death,” implying that such an assurance made to the users of free software could prove disastrous to his business, given that at the time, the commercial future of free software was entirely uncertain. Schuessler (himself a business owner) was both amused and disturbed by Young’s an- swer, and with other developers at the conference, he decided that it would behoove Debian to offer such a written guarantee.

If immediate inspiration for the Social Contract was a conversation that brought to light two divergent interpretations of accountability to a wider community of technical users, the time was quite ripe in Debian for users to accept such a contract. As the project grew larger, many felt that the group had outgrown “The Debian Manifesto.” Many developers felt it was espe- cially important to clarify their position on free software, for there was a small group clamoring to distribute nonfree software or risk losing users to the other distributions that did so. Thus when the Social Contract was proposed, it seemed like an ideal opportunity to clarify the project’s goals to both outsiders and newcomers joining in large numbers.

Led by Perens, who wrote large chunks of the document, developers pro- duced a statement of intent that helped de ne Debian’s unique role within a larger  eld of production. A crisp and short document, the Social Contract makes four promises and gives one quali cation:

- “Social Contract” with the Free Software Community
- Debian Will Remain 100% Free Software
    + We promise to keep the Debian GNU/Linux Distribution entirely free software. As there are many de nitions of free software, we in- clude the guidelines we use to determine if software is “free” below. We will support our users who develop and run non-free software on Debian, but we will never make the system depend on an item of non- free software.
- We Will Give Back to the Free Software Community
    + When we write new components of the Debian system, we will li- cense them as free software. We will make the best system we can, so that free software will be widely distributed and used. We will feed back bug- xes, improvements, user requests, etc. to the “upstream” authors of software included in our system.
- We Won’t Hide Problems
    + We will keep our entire bug-report database open for public view at all times. Reports that users  le on-line will immediately become visible to others.
- Our Priorities Are Our Users and Free Software
    + We will be guided by the needs of our users and the free-software community.
    + We will place their interests  rst in our priorities. We will support the needs of our users for operation in many different kinds of com- puting environment. We won’t object to commercial software that is intended to run on Debian systems, and we’ll allow others to create value-added distributions containing both Debian and commercial software, without any fee from us. To support these goals, we will pro- vide an integrated system of high-quality, 100% free software, with no legal restrictions that would prevent these kinds of use.
- Programs That Don’t Meet Our Free-Software Standards
    + We acknowledge that some of our users require the use of programs that don’t conform to the Debian Free Software Guidelines. We have created “contrib.” and “non-free” areas in our FTP archive for this software. The software in these directories is not part of the Debian system, although it has been con gured for use with Debian. We en- courage CD manufacturers to read the licenses of software packages in these directories and determine if they can distribute that software on their CDs. Thus, although non-free software isn’t a part of Debian, we support its use, and we provide infrastructure (such as our bug- tracking system and mailing lists) for non-free software packages.

This charter is a strong statement of intent concerning Debian’s role, commitments, and goals, declared notably beyond the Debian project to the users of this distribution. It elevates the virtues of transparency and ac- countability, and seeks to foster a commonwealth that upholds the produc- tion of free software and the pragmatic needs of users. Although the charter af rms a well-de ned moral commitment to free software and a community of users, it also formulates, in its last provision, the pragmatic limits to such “ideological” adherence, sanctioning to a limited degree the use of nonfree software by providing a place for it. In part, this decision re ected the state of free software during the period when the Social Contract was composed as well as an existing desire to ground Debian’s shared moral commitments within technical pragmatism. At the time the charter was drafted, there were a number of important software applications like browsers and word pro- cessors that simply had no robust free software equivalent. For example, while Netscape existed and was free as in beer, it was not free as in speech; the source was unavailable for use, modi cation, and circulation.

Following the creation of free software equivalents to these programs over the years, Debian has routinely debated dropping its support of non- free programs; this has even led to a “General Resolution” (resolutions are voted on by the entire project) to eliminate such programs. A resolution in March 2004 reaf rmed Debian’s commitment to this provision, though given the voluminous debate it generated, it is an issue that I imagine will

be revisited again in the near future. Drawing the line between pragmatism and utility, on the one hand, and ideological purity, on the other, is a task that Debian developers are constantly struggling with, as we will see later in this chapter.

> The DFSG is the legal corollary to the Social Contract. For a license to meet the standard of free, it must meet the following criteria:

- 1. Free Redistribution
    + The license of a Debian component may not restrict any party from selling or giving away the software as a component of an aggregate software distribution containing programs from several different sources. The license may not require a royalty or other fee for such sale.
- 2. Source Code
    + The program must include source code and also allow distribution in source code as well as compiled form.
- 3. Derived Works
    + The license must allow modi cations and derived works, and must allow them to be distributed under the same terms as the original software’s license.
- 4. Integrity of the Author’s Source Code
    + The license may restrict source code from being distributed in modi-  ed form only if the license allows the distribution of patch  les with the source code for the purpose of modifying the program at build time. The license must explicitly permit the distribution of software built from modi ed source code. The license may require derived works to carry a different name or version number from the original software.
- 5. No Discrimination against Persons or Groups
    + The license must not discriminate against any person or group of persons.
- 6. No Discrimination against Fields of Endeavor
    + The license must not restrict anyone from making use of the program in a speci c  eld of endeavor. For example, it may not restrict the program from being used in a business or for genetic research.
- 7. Distribution of License
    + The rights attached to the program must apply to everyone to whom the program is redistributed without the need for execution of an ad- ditional license by those parties.
- 8. License Must Not Be Specific to Debian
    + The rights attached to the program must not depend on the pro- gram’s being part of a Debian system. If the program is extracted from Debian, and used or distributed without Debian but otherwise within the terms of the program’s license, all parties to whom the program is redistributed should have the same rights as those that are granted in conjunction with the Debian system.
- 9. License Must Not Contaminate Other Software
    + The license must not place restrictions on other software that is distributed along with the licensed software. For example, the license must not insist that all other programs distributed on the same me- dium must be free software.

The DFSG both generalizes and speci es the GPL’s four freedoms (access, use, modi cation, and distribution). It generalizes them so that the DFSG can act as a pragmatic standard to determine the relative “freeness of a license” or as the baseline to create a new license. At the same time, it speci-  es the meanings of freedom, largely by including an explicit language of nondiscrimination—one of the document’s most salient themes. The DFSG has been assiduously excavated for discussion and debate on Debian legal and other mailing lists to help developers decide whether a piece of software they want to package and maintain has a DFSG license, or what changes to an existing license need to be made to make it DFSG free (to be explored in the next chapter).

Along with these two seminal documents, Debian also has an explicit Constitution, which was drafted after a failed  rst election and in an ef- fort to prevent the type of authoritarian leadership that some developers identi ed with Perens.8 The Debian Constitution outlines in great detail the group’s organizational structure, which includes nonelected and elected roles and responsibilities. Contained within this document is a representa- tion of Debian’s overall system of governance—its combination of majori- tarian democracy, meritocracy, and ad hoc consensus.

Debian’s democratic commitments are apparent in its voting protocols. Using a version of the Condorcet method (which guards against simple ma- jority rule by means of a complicated ranking system), the project now votes every year for the Debian project leader, and any developer can propose a General Resolution relating to technical, policy, or procedural matters for a projectwide vote. These two provisions demonstrate the populist commit- ment to give all developers a voice, and acknowledge that regardless of their level or quality of contribution, all developers, once accepted into the proj- ect, deserve some decision-making in uence. That said, the Debian project leader has assumed a decidedly nontechnical role, not vested with power to make technical decisions for the project at large, and proposing General Resolutions to resolve technical disputes is fastidiously discouraged. Strictly technical problems are not seen as appropriate objects for democratic voting.

For instance, in 2004 when one developer proposed a technically based General Resolution (calling for the support of a new architecture), this sug- gestion was ripped to shreds on the mailing lists and effectively halted by many contributors, including some of the most respected and visible Debian developers. One response conveyed the distrust of political inclusion within the technical arena that many developers hold and will consistently give voice to: “I won’t even consider this proposal until you or someone else explains to me why we should use the voting system to decide an issue like this. [ . . . ] If recent experience has shown us anything, it’s that votes HURT Debian. Please don’t take us further down this path.” Voting, in other words, blocks open and ongoing debate, the proper and most popular means by which technology should be revisioned and improved.

If the Debian project leader is not a technical position, then what is that person empowered to do? Most developers agree that the project leader acts as a public spokesperson at conferences and other events. Within the Debian community, the project leader acts to coordinate and facilitate dis- cussion, perhaps most vitally opening blocked pathways of communica- tion and aiding in con ict resolution. Their most signi cant power lies in the ability to assign or legitimate nonelected of cial roles in the form of delegates and teams—typically technical guardians, who garner respect because of their superior talents and dedication to the project. These teams and delegates perform much of the Debian-wide work, such as administer- ing mailing lists, accepting new members, running votes, and maintaining and integrating new software into the master archive. There is general faith that the Debian project leader either legitimates teams already in existence because of the work they do or assigns roles to people already doing the work.

If it is incumbent on developers to make decisions, there are nonetheless types of developers empowered with special authority to make certain kinds of decisions, usually by virtue of holding nonelected posts as individual del- egates, or within teams or committees.9 While the Debian project leader can assign a Debian developer as a delegate, and in theory is empowered to revoke any existing position, this action has never been taken within the last  ve years and possibly ever. This is signi cant. While in theory the project leader or a General Resolution can revoke the position of a technical guard- ian, in practice this would never happen. Guardianships are vetted positions, and there is strong pressure to let these people remain in their positions so long as they are doing work and desire to remain there.10

These positions are largely technical in nature. Current teams include the release manager and team, listmasters, Webmasters, Debian admin team, NMP team, security team, and policy team. These teams coordinate in or- der to work on larger-scale infrastructural or organizational structures as well as procedures. Important among these individuals are the FTP masters, who existed before there were Debian project leaders assigning teams; they review by hand all new submitted pieces of software packages for technical and licensing glitches, and integrate them into the “master archive.”11

I was repeatedly told that those who hold these nonelected positions do so because they initially undertook the work necessary to accomplish the tasks of the position. For example, some FTP masters hold their position because they coded the software used to handle package uploads and veri - cation, or the package repository software. Power, in other words, is said to closely follow on the heels of personal initiative and its close cousins: quality technical production and personal dedication to the project.

Even if most developers prefer meritocracy to democracy—in fact, nearly every developer interviewed stated with pride that Debian is meritocratic— this form of power is nonetheless shrouded in some level of distrust. Posi- tions of authority, like the FTP masters, undeniably represent a form of centralized and potentially lifelong authority, potentially subject to corrup- tion or—just as dangerous—knowledge specialization and hoarding. Hack- ers generally tend to honor decentralization and the distinct power of the individual to trump authority, so any centralized authority is bound to act as a lightning rod for re ection and debate.

There is a more speci c reason for distrust, though. To fully appreciate the texture of controversies that emerge over authority, we must revisit the argument laid out earlier. Debian developers operate within a social imagi- nary rooted in a Millian conception of liberal individualism that requires them to cultivate their skills, improve technology, and prove their worth to other hackers within their elite fraternity. Figures of central authority, such as team members and delegates, represent a potential threat to the conditions for this perpetual process of technical self-fashioning. As Donner (1991, 152) maintains in her discussion of Mill’s model of self-development, those who gain authority because of merit nonetheless “can only act as guides to others,” never as “authorities”; if they attempt to impose “judg- ments of value on others,” this “paradoxically undermines that claim to de- velopment.” Everyone, not a select order of people, must be able to exercise their capacity for thought, discrimination, and critical intervention, and at all times.

The anxiety that power could potentially corrupt those who enjoy privi- leges and block conditions for public self-development (by making choices) as well as institute a rigid form of vertical authority emerges from time to time, although in a less coherent and sustained fashion than the critiques of Debian’s democratic elements. It is far more common to joke about the existence of what is called the cabal, usually stated as a denial: “There is no cabal.” Long before Debian existed, this was a running joke on Usenet, where a similar discomfort over the potential for corruption by meritocratic leaders played out (Pfaffenberger 1996).12

In Debian joking enjoys a wide purview, and playful joking about the ca- bal is littered everywhere. For example, the evening before the 2005 Debian project leader winner was to be announced, a group of developers, including a project leader candidate and the release manager, casually slipped jokes about the cabal into the discussion, unprompted by anything except the an- nouncement by the project secretary that there were twenty-four hours to go until the voting period was over:


- <markel> less than 24 hours to go
- <crawlspace> cue sinister music
- <mickmac> I expect it all to be a conspiracy
- <mickmac> The cabal will already have chosen their candidate <jabberwalkie> mickmac: Nah, there’s still time; got your last-minute bribes ready? ;)
- <mickmac> JabberWalkie: Well, uh, no.
- <mickmac> Damnit.
- <jabberwalkie> mickmac: Better luck next year. :) <mickmac> I can offer you beer if you come to Debconf?

> *vapor-b shakes his  st at the cabal


Developers use cabal humor to express chronic anxieties about the general corruptibility of meritocracy and their distrust of top-down authority. More speci cally, it points to the way Debian “must reconcile the central notion of each developer’s autonomy [ . . . ] with the constraints deriving from the complex system with quality standards of the highest order,” as Mathieu O’Neil (2009, 134) has so aptly put it. Most of the time, these jokes are playful. They work like a safety valve to diffuse tension, and are used as a creative and oblique reminder to those in positions of authority that their intentions must be transparent for them to receive the continued trust of the developer population.

At other times, developers couch discussions of the cabal as accusations, seeking more trustworthy behavior from meritocrats, which is usually ex- pressed in claims for greater transparency, accountability, and accessibil- ity. In the recent Debian project leader debate, for example, one developer wrangled with an FTP master over what could be done to increase the proj- ect’s transparency and equalize the access conditions. The developer invoked the specter of the cabal:

> I see Debian as a meritocracy, and the way to receive privileges is to contribute and be pro-active. However, it cannot be the goal to expect from willing users to  gure out everything about a job all by them- selves prior to being able to gain recognition for the contributions they make—if they are lucky enough to be considered useful by current holders of the position strived for. If this is actually intended, then it is highly inef cient. If it is not intended, then maybe Debian wants to do something about it, and if not only to stop cold those rumours about an alleged cabal.13

This developer felt that Debian developers could do more to increase transparency in order to facilitate and encourage participation from new members. Many of the developers he was arguing with (those in positions of power) disagreed, saying that there was enough transparency and that it was incumbent on interested members to take responsibility for their own self-education, independent of the help of others. This is conveyed in the email below, where one FTP master responded to the claim that Debian policy and organization is too obscure:

    > What you fail to see is that there is something daunting about
    > a project of this size and complexity to those who are trying to
    > understand it top-down, rather than having been part of building it > bottom-up.

    What you fail to see is that the bits are available and that you “only” have to build the large picture. If you’re too lazy to do so, it’s not the job of the people working on essential corners of the project to edu- cate every random Johnny Sixpack for the sake of it.14

Even when there is pressure to equalize the conditions for access, which is manifested in jokes about the cabal, equalization within a meritocracy, as I discussed in chapter 3, must proceed by speci c methods. Many (though not all) developers feel that if too much help is given to newcomers, it will un- dercut their ability to prove their worth and intelligence within a group that values precisely this sort of performance of self-reliance. The line between the equalization of conditions and too much assistance is constantly being negotiated in Debian, and perhaps more so than in other projects because of its populist bent.

Debian’s meritocratic guardians  nd themselves in a paradoxical position with respect to hackers who accord tremendous weight to liberal individual- ism, especially constant acts of technical self-fashioning and the open-ended process of nonpartisan technical debate. Granted the authority to act with- out the community’s prior consent, the guardians rarely can do so without displaying good and pure intentions. In this way, these developers, much like the early natural philosophers of Britain’s Royal Society studied by Steven Shapin (1994), must constantly garner the trust of peers through the perfor- mance of character virtues and other related acts.

If the natural philosophers of the Royal Society displayed good faith through a combination of humility, detachment, generosity, and civility, how do the meritocratic guardians of Debian perform their good intentions and navigate this dilemma? Delegates and teams manifest their pure technical intentions through a wide range of practices (and humility is not always one of those, although it certainly can be). Many can display their intentions simply through ongoing technical work—a form of labor that speaks to their unwavering commitment to the project. They are supposed to com- municate openly with developers, and in some periods, developers voiced their dissatisfaction by clamoring for more transparency and accountability from a few of the delegates. These arguments follow a predictable arc: some developers complain about a lack of transparency among the guardians; on the other hand, the guardians feel suffocated under the weight of their obligations, so that the work necessary to communicate and increase the transparency of the role becomes an impossible, unnecessary additional bur- den; then the developers will offer to help share the workload; and typically the guardians’ exasperated response is that integrating and training new people would require more work than they can take on, or the developers need to take the initiative themselves.

Nonetheless, there are some established routines for increasing the vis- ibility and transparency of different working groups, including emails sent out to all developers on the debian-devel-announce mailing list (a required subscription for developers) that summarize the most recent activities of the different technical teams. These informal updates are sent periodically to project members and forge a connection with the body politic of Debian. One former FTP master, James Troup, known more for his technical prow- ess and dedication than for his communicative access, once sent such a status report titled “Bits from the FTP Master Team” after there had been several months of debate on the mailing lists about the opacity of the FTP master’s exact role and complaints that the FTP masters were becoming roadblocks to the project in failing to ful ll their duties. His email, drafted by a number of team members, announced the addition of new members to the team and provided some clari cation over the exact responsibilities of each member. Following this information, Troup and the other FTP mas- ters ended the email with a humorous, bitingly sarcastic remark that as- serted their goodwill while discounting the complaints as overblown: “We hope this has made your day more pleasant, and your nights less  lled with the keening wails of the soulless undead.”15 Its ironic and sardonic subtext is clear: Troup has heard and registered the complaints, is humored that people thought that the situation was so hellishly torturous, and is reveal- ing that there is nothing to worry about, because he is acting in good faith and this unnecessary email serves as his merciful act of grace releasing souls from the unbearable suffering that they were experiencing.

Along with consistent communication, delegate technical proposals must be carefully framed to re ect project and not personal goals. In many in- stances, it is imperative to let certain decisions be made through an ad hoc, consensual process in which the merit of the outcome emerges via a pro- cesses of collective debate rather than as a mandate from those with vested authority (even if the outcome falls entirely within their purview).

An interesting site to examine is the committee invested with the greatest technical power: the Technical Committee. Its role is de ned in the Consti- tution as “the body which makes the  nal decision on technical disputes in the Debian project,” and its members perform their good intentions largely by way of inaction.16 In the period during which I followed Debian (2000– 2005), for instance, this committee rarely exercised its authority.

A hands-off approach is thus how committee members establish their good intentions toward the very process that afforded them the right to become part of the Technical Committee. It re ects the general ideal that those in authority should  rst defer to the developer community so that differences of opinions can be solved through debate and consensus. The Technical Committee Web site enunciates this notion clearly under the head- ing “Some Caveats about Contacting the Committee”: “A sound and vigor- ous debate is important to ensure that all the aspects of an issue are fully explored. When discussing technical questions with other developers you should be ready to be challenged. You should also be prepared to be con- vinced! There is no shame in seeing the merit of good arguments.”17

The argumentative consensus advocated by the Technical Committee is the third mode of governance in Debian—a mode that is understood as a form of self-governance because it stems from the debate, contributions, and actions of independent-minded, consenting individuals. A tremendous faith is placed in the power of what might be called “technical rhetoric” to con- vince others of the logic of decisions that have been made. Technical rhetoric is about technical work, and frequently includes a presentation of the code, a corollary written statement, or a justi cation as to why no change should be made.

These debates happen on IRC, bug-tracking software, and mailing lists; on IRC, the process of argumentation is informal. Developers usually seek the advice of others and move on to do the work. Many times such ad- vice seeking produces robust debate, and when there are especially pro- nounced differences of opinion, this transforms civil heartiness into vibrant, sometimes-vicious  ame wars—outbursts of dissent that are character- ized by in ammatory language or direct accusations of incompetence. The Debian bug-tracking system is another site where technical jousting hap- pens, and since there is a formal system that allows developers to rate bugs according to a spectrum of severity from a wish list to severe, these debates can be tracked more systematically. The attention a given bug received can be easily tracked by the length of debate contained therein along with the multiple reassignments of different levels of severity, closing, and reopening. Some bug debates have reached legendary status because of multiple reas- signments of severity, their length, and their lack of closure. It is often during such contestations over technical questions that developers most explicitly raise issues of authority, and renegotiate the lines between democracy, con- sensus, and meritocracy that de ne their system of governance.18

-----------------------------------------
## TWO MOMENTS OF ETHICAL CULTIVATION

In terms of governance alone, Debian exhibits an extraordinarily complex moral and technical environment. It should come as no surprise that the way new members integrate themselves within this community, and learn the proper codes of conduct and procedures by which to contribute effectively to the project as well as gain the trust of other developers, is not a simple one. Although many prefer coding over organizational building, Debian develop- ers have nonetheless concocted an interesting social solution to this problem of integration and trust building—the NMP. This process addresses problems following from growth: how to build trust and encourage accountability in the space composed solely of bits and bytes along with a growing number of participants.

-----------------------------------------
## Building Trust through the NMP

Essentially a gateway for new members, the NMP de nes what is morally and technically expected of them. As such, it works powerfully as a cen- tripetal force of ethical enculturation. It is the framework within which new members  rst confront the sociopolitical and organizational milieu of Debian. This process represents the  rst time that some new members meet another Debian developer in person or “ethically voice” their commitment to free software through the proli c writing that is required of them.

Already explicitly committed to a vision of free software, Debian is to some degree a self-selecting organization, unlikely to attract programmers with a staunch commitment to upholding the current status of intellec- tual property law. But the NMP is unique insofar as it requires prospec- tive Debian developers not only to study detailed texts on the ethics of free software (such as the GPL, Social Contract, and DFSG) but also to produce their own texts on the subject. Through the NMP, developers produce ethi- cally relevant discourse. The extensive narrative work of the NMP makes Debian’s codi ed values personally relevant, and this in turn breeds social commitment to the project.

As Debian grew quickly, the project found itself in the midst of a crisis that peaked between 1998 and 1999. New members were being admitted at rates faster than the project’s ad hoc social systems could integrate them. Some longtime developers grew skeptical of the quality of incoming devel- opers, complaining that they introduced more bugs into the system than helpful contributions. The populism of open membership began to come under attack. Some developers suggested that Debian had reached its satu- ration point.19

In response to these problems, the Debian account manager (who creates accounts for new members) waged a silent revolt by halting the processing of new maintainer accounts—essentially preventing any new members from being able to join the project. This move eventually led the account manager to of cially stop accepting members under the informal procedures. Instead, the manager proposed formalized procedures that could systematically en- sure the trustworthiness of new members as members of the community.

The procedure developed was Debian’s NMP. First presented in Octo- ber 17, 1999, as a proposal on a mailing list, its preamble (quoted below) indicates that the “growing pains” Debian had been experiencing were not merely technical but also ethical. A small group of developers had been clamoring to loosen the commitment to free software and integrate nonfree software in order to be competitive with commercial distributions whose ethical commitments were less stringent. Even though the constitutional charter was already established, the spirit of free software was seemingly losing its potency with the addition of each new wave of developers. The Debian project leader listed the following criteria by which to select new members, and note that the  rst line is intentionally repeated:

    —needs to have a *strong* oppinion [sic] for free software
    —needs to have a *strong* oppinion [sic] for free software
    —he needs to be able+willing to make long distance phone calls [for
    an interview]
    —He needs to know what he’s doing, that new people need some
    guidance,
    we have to prevent ourselves from trojans etc.
    —we need to trust him—more than we trust *any* other active person —He *has to* understand that new-maintainer is *more* than just creating dumb accounts on n [n being a numerical variable] machines

Out of this initial proposal and the establishment of an NMP team, the NMP created a standard that all developers must meet. The NMP is struc- tured not only as a test but also as a process for learning, mentoring, and integrating prospective developers into the project by making them work on packaging a piece of software closely with at least one older, “trusted,” project member.

Before prospective developers formally enter the NMP, they are  rst asked to identify the contributions they plan to make to Debian. They are encouraged to demonstrate their commitment to the project, express why they want to join, and display some level of technical pro ciency. For most developers, this involves making a software package and—because only ex- isting developers can integrate a piece of software into the larger GNU/ Linux distribution— nding an existing developer to “sponsor” their work. New maintainers work closely with their sponsors, who check their work for common errors and take partial responsibility for the new maintainer. This supervision is important, because in addition to gaining technical skills, the new volunteer begins to participate in the project’s social sphere. Pro- spective developers are encouraged to join mailing lists and IRC channels that provide the medium for technical as well as social communication.

A new maintainer’s sponsor often acts as the new applicant’s advocate when the maintainer applies for project membership. Advocates are exist- ing developers who vouch for new developers along their history of and potential for contributions to the community. Early in the NMP, the issue of establishing trust is crucial. After the applicant’s advocacy has been approved, that person of cially becomes part of the NMP, and then an ap- plication manager is assigned to guide the new developer through the re- mainder of the process. It is this manager who handles the rest of the process by acting simultaneously as a mentor, examiner, and evaluator. While it is certainly the case, as phrased condescendingly by one Debian developer, that a “village idiot can’t join Debian,” this mentorship is the NMP’s implicit concession to the limits of a meritocratic imperative that would otherwise require a person to prove their worth entirely on their own.

The NMP includes three steps and requires considerable work on the part of applicants. The process is used to con rm the new maintainers’ iden- tity, knowledge and position on free software philosophy, and pro ciency with the established Debian policies and procedures as well as their overall technical expertise and knowledge.20

The identify veri cation is accomplished by obtaining the cryptographic signature of at least one existing Debian developer on their personal GNU privacy guard key. This key is encrypted with a pass phrase that is known only to the person holding that key. When properly unlocked with the pass phrase, a signature can be generated, and that signature can then in turn be attached to a particular email message, text, or piece of software. With an attached signature, it is proof that it originated from the person possessing the key. When key owners meet in person, they establish their identity to each other by exchanging pieces of government-issued picture identi ca- tion and the key  ngerprint, which uniquely identi es the key itself. Hav- ing traded and veri ed this information, developers later place their unique cryptographic signature on each other’s keys to con rm to others that they have connected the key being signed with the individual in possession of those identity documents. This is a process of identity veri cation that can then be used over the Internet to con rm, with certainty, that an individual is who they say they are.

By requiring new developers to obtain the signature of an existing Debian developer, the NMP integrates them into what they call a crypto- graphic “web of trust.” Because nearly every hacker within Debian has a key signed by at least one existing developer, and because many developers have keys signed by numerous others (the stronger the connected set of signatures is, the more trustworthy it is considered), nearly all maintain- ers are connected. Debian can use cryptographic algorithms to prove that most every developer met at least one other developer, who in turn met at least one other developer, and so forth, until every developer is linked. Debian’s administrative software depends heavily on these keys to identify users for the purposes of integrating software into the distribution, for controlling access to machines, allowing access to a database with sensi- tive information on developers, and restricting publication to announce- only email lists.


The importance of meeting in person to sign the keys is illustrated in the following anecdote, which begins with the controversial claim of one Debian developer:

> I have a potentially controversial thesis. My thesis is that the “Raul Miller” who is a Debian Developer and sits on the Technical Committee (and was, for a time, its chairman) doesn’t actually exist.
You see, Mr. Miller joined the project before we had the current procedures for vetting developers’ identities, and even before we had the semi-informal ones under which I myself was admitted to the project in 1998. Interestingly, there are no signatures on Mr. Miller’s PGP key other than his own. A re- markable accomplishment for someone who’s been with the project this long, but not so surprising for someone whom no other developer has, as far as I can tell, ever claimed to have met in person.21

When it became clear that Miller, who occupied a crucial technical posi- tion in the project at that time, was outside the web of trust, there was such alarm that within three days, two developers drove to meet the individual in question and succeeded in bringing him into the cryptographic network. The developers’ strong reactions demonstrated the essential nature of these infrequent face-to-face interactions and signi cance of verifying the identity of one of their technical guardians.

Integration into Debian’s web of trust is thus a vital  rst step in new maintainers’ integration into the Debian project. This process connects and leads into the second and often most rigorous part of the NMP: philosophy and procedures. The  rst part of the application requires that new maintain- ers provide a declaration of intention, a proof of some contribution or skill they could bring to the project, and undergo the philosophy and procedure testing, which includes a biographical narrative of why and how they be- came involved in free software and Debian.

During this philosophy step in the NMP, application managers ask pro- spective developers a series of questions regarding free software and Debian philosophy. While general knowledge of the de nition and philosophy re- lated to F/OSS is essential, the questions revolve around Debian’s Social Contract and DFSG. New maintainers are asked a series of questions—some culled from a standard template, and others created anew—to demonstrate their familiarity with these documents, ability to apply and synthesize the concepts encapsulated within them, and capacity to articulate their agree- ment with as well as commitment to the Debian ideals.

Although each new maintainer must agree to the Social Contract, the philosophy test does not require developers to hold a homogeneous view on free software. Rather, it seeks to ensure that all Debian developers are knowledgeable about, interested in, and dedicated to its basic principles. Open-ended questions frequently turn into longer email conversations between application managers and prospective developers in which the subtleties about licensing along with free software philosophy are dissected. While I have heard some developers complain of the “wait” and “bureau- cracy” introduced by the NMP, or even the absurdity of some of the techni- cal questions, I have never heard an objection levied against this part of the application. In fact, most developers recall the philosophy section as enjoy- able and rewarding.

In particular, the initial biography allows developers to take an inven- tory of their technical past, in a way that starts to imbue it with a decidedly ethical dimension. It is worth quoting large blocks of an application here to offer a sense of the remarkable detail and nuance of these writings. Below I quote a short section from a developer answering the biographical question:

> This is my story about free software: In the  rst times I was excited by the idea of something to which everybody could contribute, just like that In- ternet that I was discovering at the same time. I could also see that it had a future, because of that part that said that all the contributions would remain free. Wow! At the same time, I was seeing many closed softwares rise and fall (DOS, Windows 3.x, OS/2, compiler environments, BBS software, Of-  ce suites, hardware drivers, proprietary format backup suites, whatever), and everytime they got superseded by some other thing, support fell, bugs remained un xed, data became unreadable and nobody could do anything about it except spending lots of time and resources relearning everything and porting or even restarting their works from scratch. [ . . . ]

> I realized that Free Software was and is the only thing that potentially allows you to be free of the risks that (usually silly) external events pose on your know-how and on the software that you depend on. [ . . . ]

> This is about me and my time for Debian:
Between  ve and six years have passed running Debian, and my experience with it has grown. I got used to the Debian phylosophy [sic], did some experi- ence with the BTS [bug-tracking system], read some mailing lists, the DWN, got curious and somewhat knowledgeable on how Debian works, read pages, policies, discussions, I even went to the LSM and Debian One. [ . . . ]
The packages that I used to create, however, were not perfect, and I would have needed to better study the various Debian policies and manuals to do some better job. Willing to do that, I thought it was silly not to become an of cial maintainer, and start contributing to the project myself, so that others could take advantage of that knowledge I was about to acquire.

The  first section usually sticks to a standard technical life history, gesturing toward the ethical uniqueness of F/OSS, yet it is told in a mode hinged to practical life experiences with technology. Often told in a confessional tone, such essays are as much a biography about not only one’s own discovery of this speci c project but also how one arrived at the principles upheld in Debian itself.

The philosophy aspect of the philosophy and procedures section also cov- ers the Social Contract and DFSG, and it is here where the ethical voicing becomes strikingly pronounced. In contrast to the descriptive register of the biographical section, here prospective developers are required to formulate their personal views on free software, moving from personal experiences toward re ective generalizations regarding the legal and ethical principles they are committing to in joining this project. Let me  rst share the text before commenting on its implications. Below is an excerpt from a differ- ent application than the one quoted above. This applicant, responding to the question “Please explain the key points of the Social Contract and the DFSG—in your own words,” remarks:

- The Social Contract is the commitment the Debian project makes to its mem- bers and users. It is about fostering a community so committed to software freedom, so open, and so supportive that no one would have need to go elsewhere. Debian’s members and users bene t from the fact that Debian is completely free software and that nothing in the Debian process is hidden from them.
-  Debian also provides an outlet for new free software and a “channel” for contributing changes back to the original developers. It also takes the re- alistic view that some users may still be using non-free software and that providing this software actually helps Debian’s users and indirectly the free software community.
-  The Debian Free Software Guidelines is the set of concrete rules that help de- termine if a piece of software complies with the Social Contract and the Proj- ect’s goals. The rules in the DFSG are chosen to make sure software accepted into Debian maintains the user’s freedoms to use, distribute, and modify that software now and forever. This is not just for Debian’s users but anyone who might take software in Debian and modify it, create CDROMs, or even create a derivative distribution. [ . . . ]

    > Also, describe what you personally think about these documents.

- The Social Contract and the DFSG represent a very unique idea. In this day and age where society (at least in the US and some other  rst world coun- tries) encourages individualism and tries to divide the people and control them it is very refreshing to read the Debian Social Contract. Proprietary software made by commercial software companies/developers is exactly that, commercial. Those companies/developers are only about pro t or ad- vancing their agenda and will do what they need to in order to maximize that. Often this con icts with doing the right thing for the user and here are some examples,
- —If a company/developer sells a piece of proprietary software that, as all software does, has bugs and they also sell incident based support contracts then what incentive do they have for  xing bugs in the software?
- —If a company/developer’s revenue stream is based on selling new versions of their proprietary software, what incentive do they have for  xing bugs in the old one rather than forcing users to pay for a new upgrade they may not want. [ . . . ]
- —Imagine a company/developer that develops a proprietary application that initially meets the users needs so well and is priced reasonably that they gain a monopoly on the market. With the competition gone they can raise their prices or bundle additional unwanted applications into their software, or do pretty much anything they want.
- —Now imagine a company/developer that uses that monopoly in one market to gain entry and into other markets and attacking users’ freedoms in those as well.
- In all these examples the company/developer bene ts at the expense of the users.
- In order to prevent situations like this one of the things the Social Contract/ DFSG effectively says is this,
- “Our users are so important to us that we are setting these ground rules to protect their freedoms. If you can develop software that meets these rules then not only do we invite you to include it in Debian, but we accept you into the our community and will expend our resources to distribute your soft- ware, help keep track of bugs it may have and features that could be added, and help you improve and support it.”
- In addition to that statement several of the DFSG’s clauses have the effect of saying,
- “We are so committed to doing the right thing and working together with anyone in an open manner to resolve differences and always do the right thing for the users that we’re willing to let you have all the work that we’ve done. You can do whatever you wish with it as long as you obey the original author’s license.” [ . . . ]
- These are very powerful ideas that can’t be taken away or subverted by some- one who wants to extort or control users. Personally, I think my interest in getting involved with Debian is an extension of my overall views and this is the only way that I want to use and develop software.


While the content of this narrative certainly matters, I want to stress the type of ethical labor being produced by this text. The developer takes the vision ensconced in the Debian charters and adds value to it in numer- ous personalized ways: he reformulates its key principles in his own words; to hone down his points, he makes a fairly sophisticated contrast between proprietary and free software development largely along the ethical lines that matter to him—transparency, openness, and accountability; and he poi- gnantly concludes with a succinct commitment to this style of development.

What we see here with these applications is what Cover, in his discussion of a nomos, describes as a simultaneous process of subjective commitment to and objective projection of norms, or a bridging that emerges out of a narrative mode. “This objecti cation of the norms to which one is com- mitted frequently,” Cover (1993, 145; emphasis added) observes, “perhaps always entails a narrative—a story of how the law, now object, came to be, and more importantly, how it came to be one’s own.” This is precisely what occurs during the NMP. Developers af rm their commitment to the principles enshrined in their key charters largely by way of a speci c gravi- tational pull: the force of their life experiences is brought to bear directly on these documents, thereby rendering them objectively real, but in a way that subjectively matters within one’s personal orbit of life experiences. This is followed by a second move, which betrays subjective personalization. De- velopers voice the broader importance of these principles and clarify the social implications of their commitments. Neither purely subjective nor ob- jective accounts, these narratives form a bridge between them.

Moreover, the narratives are at the basis of temporal movement and per- sonal transformation. They take people to new locations, and past, present, and future come together in a moment of ethical assessment. The past is weaved into the present, and the voicing of commitment in the application becomes the path toward a future within the project. It is a step that brings a developer closer to a new social localization within a larger ethical and technical project of developers who have also undergone the same re ective exercise.

Through this recon guration of temporality, developers after the NMP can be said to share at least three connections: they are technologically linked through the web of trust that requires them to meet at least one other developer; they share the experience of a common ritual of entry; and  nally, they have started to learn a Debian-speci c vocabulary with which to situate themselves within this world, formulate the broader implications of freedom, and continue the conversation on freedom, licensing, and their craft, with a wider body of developers.

Although the philosophy aspect of the NMP often results in voluminous expository output, it is by no means the bulk of the process; in fact, it is only half of step three of a  ve-step process. The other half of the philosophy step is known as procedures, in which applicants must demonstrate what the general policies are as well as their ability to perform whatever individual responsibilities they wish to take on within the project itself. Once the phi- losophy and procedures step is deemed appropriately passed, the applicant moves on to the rigorous tasks and skills step. This step con rms that the applicant has the necessary skills to carry out the job that they will take on as a Debian developer. These tests vary depending on what the applicant will be doing, but typically involve many technical questions. The overall pro- cess generally results in several dozen pages of exhaustive responses along with many back-and-forth discussions and clari cations over months (and sometimes up to a year) with the assigned application manager.

If accepted into the project, some developers slip into relative obscurity. Some do not actively participate in Debian’s dynamic culture of debate and dialogue. Some follow only as spectators, while others could care less about what are perceived as overly dramatic conversations and concentrate wholly on their technical contributions. But for most developers, in ethical terms, the NMP is a highly condensed version of what  ows and follows in the social metabolism of the project, though in a slightly altered version. The narrative work that transforms codi ed norms into meaningful ones contin- ues within the project itself, and the knowledge gained during the process is necessary for newcomers to integrate effectively into the project.

Interactions among developers in the ongoing debates tend to be less concerned with the nature of the principles they committed to in the NMP than with the implications of these principles. In other words, common prin- ciples start to diverge into a multiplicity of newly generated ethical mean- ings, some of which alter the basic procedures and structures of the project. Even if their interpretations of principles diverge, developers usually refer to the charters or shared precepts in arguments, and as such, these precepts are kept actively relevant. Divergence and disagreement is thus the basis for moral coexistence. I turn next to one such moment of group crisis.

-----------------------------------------
## CRISIS AND ETHICAL RENEWAL

Punctuated moments of distrust and despair are responsible for a great deal of the existing framework of Debian itself. Crises occur when there are fun- damental disagreements over some issue. These can range from governance to legality, but many consistently revolve around a limited set of themes: project transparency, major technical decisions, the meaning and scope of freedom, and the relations between ordinary developers and those with vested power. These grievances are expressed on mailing lists, IRCs, and blogs; the writing that unfolds during moments of crisis is both voluminous and markedly passionate.

These punctuated moments are eminently precarious: the nomos is under threat, populated by all sorts of pitfalls and dangers. The drama of dis- ease can spread uncontrollably like a virus, channeling the potent energy of dissatisfaction into a pit of destabilizing disgust or despair. Tempers  are, leading to in ammatory remarks that burn bridges, and people sometimes cling too literally to codi ed norms, blinding them to a unique situation that yearns for its own unique response. The crisis may be of such great magni- tude that it overshadows the positive energy that moves the project toward a solution.

Despite their riskiness, however, periods of crisis are also among the most fertile instances of ethical production, articulation, and transformation; their mere expression is proof that people are ethically “on call.” People would not be willing to take sides if they did not feel personally invested in changing what is collectively diagnosed as a problem. Crisis periods are in- cipient calls for movement and realignment, and hence reveal commitments that, if acted on, can lead to positive solutions and a profound renewal of the organization.

The formal attributes of crisis—its drama, high-pitched emotional na- ture, and kinetic energy—have an ethical subtext that speaks to the fact that an altered situation or unsatisfactory event has arisen that demands immediate, overt attention. A crisis demands a response —one that a charter or code cannot fully provide but rather must be sculpted through a fraught process of voicing, debate, and action.

Because the emotional tone of communication induced by a crisis can diverge signi cantly from the way many developers expect or desire com- munication to unfold, I run the risk of portraying crisis as a positive force that can contribute to moral cohesion. Many developers adhere to a Haber- masian (and so quite liberal) ideal of communicative interaction that re- quires participants to shed personal interest and passion in favor of sober rational discussion, where clarity is achieved because “all participants stick to the same reference point” (Habermas 1987, 198). While communication can certainly happen along those lines and be ethically productive, it down- plays the inherently risky nature of many communicative acts (Butler 1997; Gardiner 2004). Judith Butler (1997, 87–88) in Excitable Speech probably states this most poignantly when she argues that the Habermasian project is self-limiting, possibly undermining its democratic aspirations, because of its insistence on eliminating personal interest and the inherent risk in the act of communication:

> Risk and vulnerability are proper to the democratic process in the sense that one cannot know in advance the meaning that the other will assign to one’s utterance, what con icts of interpretation may well arise, and how best to adjudicate the difference. The effort to come to terms is not one that can be resolved in anticipation but only through a concrete struggle of translation, one whose success has no guarantees.

Now let us take a look at one legendary “concrete struggle of translation”— one whose resolution looked quite tenuous at the time of its unfolding.

-----------------------------------------
## PORTRAIT OF A CRISIS

The  rst story of ethics in Debian that I presented began with an ending: the NMP was a solution to a crisis over the integration of new members. In fact, it created a social architecture that, while imperfect, continues to sus- tain a baseline level of trust and coherence, and helps to absorb and lessen the shocks of future crises. Yet punctuated periods of distrust or malaise invariably recur, and here I focus on one of the most memorable to have hit Debian in the last ten years. So as the opening of this section on ethical moments began with the story of an ending, the closing of this section will end with a beginning.

There are a number of events that I could have chosen to illustrate the social metabolism of a crisis in Debian. I have picked this one because of the rich multiplicity of issues it raises, and because I actually witnessed and closely followed its ebb and  ow from the instant it began to its current recession.

Let me provide some background on the project’s status at the time in March 2005. Debian was in the process of choosing a new leader. There were several candidates, and the ideas they brought to the table concerned fundamental questions of governance that could alter the nature of the Debian project leadership, communications issues, the role of women in the project, transparency, a perceived hostile working climate, growing pains, and the uncertain threat of a new Linux project based on Debian (Ubuntu). The project was gearing up to complete a new release, and given this, there was a heightened sense of pressure. It was in this frenetic climate that a single email began the crisis.

The Debian release manager sent this email to the developer list, an- nouncing the  nal plans for releasing Debian’s latest distribution. An in- person meeting in mid-March had convened in Vancouver, Canada, bringing together the FTP masters, the release team, and members of the security team to hammer out a plan that offered a concrete vision for Debian’s tech- nical future. In addition to information about the upcoming release, pro- posals were advanced detailing how to handle the release after that, called “etch.” The participants in the Vancouver meeting had concluded that the era of universal architecture support was over. Debian did not have the technical or human resources to support as well as maintain so many differ- ent versions of Debian at the time. These “ports,” as these different versions are called, run on different hardware architectures, ranging from i386 to AMD64:

> The much larger consequence of this meeting, however, has been the craft- ing of a prospective release plan for etch. The release team and the FTP mas- ters are mutually agreed that it is not sustainable to continue making co- ordinated releases for as many architectures as Sarge currently contains, let alone for as many new proposed architectures as are waiting in the wings. The reality is that keeping eleven architectures in a releasable state has been a major source of work for the release team, the d-i team, and the kernel team over the past year; not to mention the time spent by the DSA/build admins and the security team. It’s also not clear how much bene t there is from doing stable releases for all of these architectures, because they aren’t necessarily useful to the communities surrounding those ports. Therefore, we’re planning on not releasing most of the minor architectures starting with etch. They will be released with Sarge, with all that implies (includ- ing security support until Sarge is archived), but they would no longer be included in testing. This is a very large step, and while we’ve discussed it fairly thoroughly and think we’ve got most of the bugs worked out, we’d appreciate hearing any comments you might have. [ . . . ]
> Note that this plan makes no changes to the set of supported release architec- tures for Sarge, but will take effect for testing and unstable immediately after Sarge’s release with the result that testing will contain a greatly reduced set of architectures, according to the following objective criteria:

    —it must  rst be part of (or at the very least, meet the criteria for) scc. debian.org (see below)
    —the release architecture must be publicly available to buy new
    —the release architecture must have N+1 builds where N is the number required to keep up with the volume of uploaded packages
    —the value of N above must not be > 222

At first glance it may be unclear what in this technical, matter-of-fact email would have led to a crisis. The meeting’s participants included the technical guardians of Debian, and their advice is usually held with re- spect. But before I explain why such a seemingly benign proposal produced such an event,  rst let me describe the response, for it was nothing short of monumental—even by Debian standards of crisis. Within the  rst day there were over  ve hundred email messages in response, and within three days, there were over nine hundred emails. This text of mailing lists, if taken together, could probably  ll one or possibly two multivolume dissertations. On IRCs, conversation was bubbling nonstop about this debacle. Posts ana- lyzing the event and its signi cance appeared on Planet Debian, the group Debian blog that aggregates individual developer’s blogs. I had to spend days reading this material.

The cascade of responses was astonishing. It is  rst worth portraying the atmosphere of utter paradox that arose, in which synchronicity sat along- side unsettling discordance. The project was in one of the most pronounced moments of unity that I had seen in a long time. Hundreds and hundreds of developers gave the problem their due attention in the form of numerous writings—on mailing lists, IRCs, and blogs. For days the project felt like it was riding the same but nevertheless dangerously large and unstable collec- tive wave. This was also a moment of pronounced dis-ease and thus discor- dance, where differences of opinion rang loud and overblown accusations prevailed, as if a furious legion of frenzied and rabid hydra had suddenly appeared on the scene, with each individual head screeching, rearing, and rending in all directions.

It felt as if Debian was coming apart at its seams. But a duality of cen- trifugal discordance and centripetal synchronicity de nes crisis. Crisis sits at a crossroads, a moment of betwixt and between when outcomes are decid- edly uncertain. During this period, people were brought together to express their deep dissatisfaction, but pulled apart from one other by different sets of con icting opinions—including over the very reaction—with unity under dire threat. There was a sense that this crisis was at once remarkably silly and overblown, a distraction from the work required by the immanent re- lease, yet fully important and serious, as if some line had been crossed. Why? What was it about this particular email that caused such collective alarm?

The crisis rested on several factors. Notably, the developers were able to suture a wide range of concerns to this email, but one of the most signi cant complaints, stated over and again, was about its tone: its disharmonious resonance struck the wrong collective chord, working to resurrect the proj- ect’s perennial discomfort over the corruptibility of meritocratic authority. Other precipitating factors included its timing and content. Last but not least was the email’s content, which many developers found shocking. Over the course of many years, Debian had built an image of being a Universal OS, special among its class because it ran on more architectures than any other Linux distribution. Developers had informally animated the edi ce of the DFSG’s nondiscrimination clause to include architecture support. The announcement that the era of technical universality was perhaps soon to be part of its past was a huge blow to Debian’s sense of collective pride.

Complaints about the email’s tone centered on the following sentence: “The release team and the FTP masters are mutually agreed that it is not sustainable to continue making coordinated releases for as many architec- tures as Sarge currently contains, let alone for as many new proposed archi- tectures as are waiting in the wings.” Even though the email was stated as a proposal, below is a short excerpt from an IRC discussion that articulated the shock that the email produced:

- <kivet> mm, I certainly didn’t expect the meeting to be quite so wide- ranging; in advance, I rather expected it to be mostly “ok, let’s sort out Sarge; [ . . . ] oh, and in the  ve minutes we have left, how can we look to avoid this in the future?”
- <yaarr> vapor-b: if you wanted open discussion, you should have stopped in your tracks when it became apparent that other people might be interested in the subject. Don’t do shadowy meetings on your part and request open discussion from us.
- <stig> Yaarr: but that is what happened: they put out a proposal and now it can be discussed.
- <yaarr> yeah, sure
- <markel> and the announcement, signed off by all the people who do the work, and most future dpl candidates, had an unfortunate ring of  nal- ity. If indeed this is a proposal, that is open to serious discussion (as opposed to “this is the way it is, unless you happen to convince all of us of something else, despite the hours of discussion where we ham- mered it all out”), than [sic] perhaps a follow-up is in order.
- <markel> stig: I don’t know about you, but my comprehension of the English language has been often deemed adequate, and my take of the announcement was a fait accompli.
- <yaarr> stig: as I told you before, the idea is for our statement to be con- structive, in that it’ll try to suggest some modi cations that will make this mess a bit less of a problem to us.

What this discussion demonstrates is that by presenting a fairly signi cant technical change in a way that seemed like an established decision, the del- egates violated the norms of acceptable and appropriate behavior. In this proposal, many developers found it dif cult to believe in the “pure technical intentions” of entrusted members. What had failed here was a necessary performance of the goodwill that normally acts to limit anxieties about cor- ruption in meritocracies, especially those with hierarchies like Debian.

What this event revealed is that Debian’s implementation of meritocracy, like all meritocracies, is a fragile framework easily overtaken by the threat of corruptibility. In the case of Debian, this threat is particularly onerous, for it can potentially block the conditions for rough technical consensus; this event ostensibly edged too close to such corruption for the project’s comfort zone.

Within Debian, the delegates and teams hold a similar form of author- ity as the mythical philosopher king and his guardians presented in one of the most favorable accounts of meritocratic rule, Plato’s Republic. In this imagined world, rulers are granted authority for life by virtue of their talents, their passion for the inherent good of ruling, and a well-cultivated character that breeds the proper “intent” for rule. Leaders are those who are “full of zeal to do whatever they believe is for the good of the common- wealth and never willing to act against its interest. They must be capable of possessing this connection, never forgetting it or allowing themselves to be either forced or bewitched into throwing it over” (Plato n.d.). This senti- ment is eerily descriptive of the ways in which Debian developers conceive of proper meritocratic rule. Team members and delegates are entrusted to hold technical authority for as long as they want to (insofar the Debian project leader has never removed someone from these positions), because they display their “zeal” to do good for the “technical commonwealth” of Debian through superior acts of technical production.

In Plato’s imaginary republic, rulers were kept in check by being subject to a highly public presence and the demands of rigorous ascetic life—little property and no domestic relations. These components con rmed and sus- tained proper intent. But in Debian, there are few formal mechanisms to curb the excesses of power of those who have been granted positions of technical authority. Teams and delegates, in theory, are fully trusted members who no longer have to perform their intent in order to prove their worth and make decisions. The teams that convened in Vancouver were empowered to make the signi cant technical decisions that they proposed. Yet in practice (as this crisis made clear), such decisions would be dif cult to pull off without  rst consulting and building technical consensus. The guardians are bound by the informal codes discussed earlier in this chapter by which they must be seen to act not out of a self-interest but instead always in the interest of the Debian project.

Given this, the overwhelming response to the Vancouver prospectus was a reaction to the perceived violation of meritocratic trust, and during this period, accusations of a cabal proliferated. It seemed to some as if the myth, the joke, of “smoky backrooms” in Debian was perhaps no joke at all. But if the crisis raised the specter of mistrust, it was also the very mechanism by which trust was rebuilt again. The overt public voicing and revoicing that the Vancouver meeting “smacks too much of deals in smoky backrooms, where a seat at the table is by explicit invitation,” was a moment of col- lective clari cation. The backlash and conversations that called Debian’s philosopher kings to task served to call attention to what was seen as poten- tially inappropriate exercises of technical meritocratic authority as well as an opportunity for Debian guardians to assert that no such thing had ever happened.

Through an overwhelming tide of emails, many of these delegates were forced to explain the reasoning behind their recommendation that Debian limit architecture support. In turn, developers contributed their own views on what would have been the proper way to approach the problem, and others contributed discussions and proposals about how to technically pro- ceed. The release manager and another member of the participating teams were remarkably attentive: they wrote emails and talked to developers on IRCs to appease fears, explained technical details, took into account the recommendations of others, revealed what happened at the meeting, and especially, reaf rmed that nothing was written in stone. In essence, they conformed to the stipulation by Plato (n.d.) that “[the guardians] must be capable of possessing this connection, never forgetting it or allowing them- selves to be either forced or bewitched into throwing it over.” In contrast with Plato’s Republic, what this crisis shows is how in Debian, anyone can theoretically become a philosopher king so long as they posses the right intent and skill, and so long as the channels for dialogue are kept open. As a result of these often-passionate outpourings, the proposal was transformed into a proposition awaiting further discussion. In the end, although it took a blow, trust was reestablished.

One participant and member of the FTP team posted the following expla- nation, which provided a window into the meeting’s organic development and af rmed the proposal’s openness:

> As it happened, James and I were staying at Ryan’s, and after dinner on Fri- day night (before the meeting proper started, but after we’d met everyone), we chatted about the topic and came to the opinion that removing a bunch of architectures from being release candidates would be necessary—for rea- sons I hope are adequately explained in the announcement, or that will be on –devel as people ask. As it turned out, when we got to the actual meeting the next day, this was more or less exactly what Steve was wanting to propose, and he seemed to be expecting most of the objections to come from James, Ryan and/or me. So instead of that, we then spent a fair while discussing criteria for what support architectures would/should receive.

Hopefully the above provides some useful speci cs for people to talk about.

>As a result, the rest of the project had little input into >the decision-making process.

    That’s why it’s posted on the lists now—it [is] never too late to get input into something in Debian; even after we’ve committed to something, we can almost always change our minds [emphasis added].


Due to these outpourings, many of which were wildly passionate, any ambi- guity as to the proposal’s status was dispelled, transforming it to an unam- biguous proposition waiting to be further explored.

When the acute phase of the Vancouver crisis was over, energy was di- verted back to releasing the subsequent version of Debian: Sarge. Certainly, there remains a tremendous amount of work to be done on the technical problem of architecture support in Debian, and there are many broader questions about governance that this crisis raised. Even if it was af rmed that entrusted members of Debian should consult the entire project before proposing radical changes, there seems to be a growing unease among many developers over the scalability of technical consensus. The rough consensus that so many developers are proud of seems to have gotten rougher with the addition of each new developer, and eventually Debian developers may have to start thinking about novel social solutions to accommodate these changes. For that period, however, the work laid out by the Vancouver pro- spectus was entrusted to anyone who has a stake in the process. The  eld had been momentarily leveled despite the hierarchies of power that emerge from a meritocratic system.

If much of the work performed during this crisis reopened the decision- making process to the whole project, it also allowed developers to collec- tively af rm that the values they tend to desire from technology (account- ability, openness, and access) are those that they also expect from project governance and members of their project, especially those who hold vet- ted positions of power. Nonetheless, Debian is a dynamic organization. It changes. And through these types of unforeseen con icts, the door to a re-  ective process of assessing is frequently opened, allowing developers to revoice their commitment to informal norms of governance and begin the design work to reach new solutions within these norms.

While the charters codify these values, the texts do not fully determine their signi cance within the everyday life of the project. The values must be enacted in various guises—one of which is a passionate outpouring of commitments during moments of dis-ease. Mikhail Bakhtin’s discussion of ethical situationalism can help account for the necessity and importance of the crisis as a moment in which preexisting norms and codes break down, and then need to be rearticulated. In Toward a Philosophy of the Act, Bakhtin offers an ethical theory of action that repudiates the impli- cations of formalistic theories of ethics, particularly Immanuel Kant’s categorical imperative. Formalism requires what Bakhtin interprets as a suspect allegiance to universally conceived theoretical precepts standing above time and place.23 Bakhtin argues that an overallegiance to theoreti- cal precepts misdirects and thus disables responsibility instead of channel- ing it toward an active confrontation with the living moment in its full- blooded complexity. The effect of such “acts of abstraction,” says Bakhtin (1993, 7; emphasis added), is to be “controlled by [ . . . ] autonomous laws” in which people are “no longer present in it as individually and an- swerable active human beings.”

Although Bakhtin’s dismissal of codi ed norms is somewhat over- stated—in fact as I have been contending here, norms are more practical then he suggests; they are necessary guiding abstractions that establish a common ground for action and social cohesion—his critique nonetheless clari es a number of key points. For Bakhtin, the most problematic aspect of formal ethics is that they provide a false sense of security, “an alibi” for an actual ethical being that downplays the inherent risk and con ict of making decisions along with the necessity of working toward solutions. The hard labor of ethics, its demanding phenomenology, is an outgrowth of taking risks, putting in the effort to engage with others, and choosing to confront the situation at hand in its speci city.

Despite Bakhtin’s repudiation of theoretical dogmatism, he is careful to steer away from advocating moral relativism. As Michael Gardiner (2004, 39) maintains, Bakhtin rejects relativism for its shaky theoretical presumption that “a priori the mutual incomprehension of view [ . . . ] renders authentic dialogue super uous.” Rather, Bakhtin asserts that in- dividuals can potentially achieve some level of consensus because they are situated within a shared world of meaning. Despite clear differences in opinion that are unquestionably made evident during periods of crisis, people participating in a collective endeavor are nevertheless situated in a shared social space and committed to a baseline set of goals. As a result of Debian developers’ common participation in the project and shared ritu- als of entry such as the NMP, common participation within the broader hacker public, and participation in public events like conferences, they can draw on a set of shared experiences to work toward resolving crisis. This is an important condition of possibility that speaks to a potential, though not a guarantee, for consensus. To reach agreement, ethical labor must still be performed.


-----------------------------------------
## CONCLUSION

Given what I have written in this chapter, I hope it is clear that the praxis of ethics among Debian developers is diverse and ongoing; the making of a nomos is a dynamic affair. At times, ethical work occurs as an implicit form of enculturation, and in other moments, it takes shape as a re ective voicing through which a series of temporally and personally signi cant transforma- tions are declared as well as achieved. For example, the new maintainer narratives allow developers to reevaluate their lives, making them into life histories that publicly offer a current and future commitment to a common- wealth. Crises represent moments of limits; charters and even routine nar- rative discussion are never enough to confront the emergent realities of new situations. In the simplest terms possible, an ethical life demands constant attention, response, reevaluation, and renewal.

A critical question remains: Can we generalize Debian to illuminate the ethical processes of other virtual or F/OSS projects? With such a stark ad- herence to well-established ethical precepts, is Debian in fact just the radical black sheep of development projects? Or do other projects exhibit similar social, organizational, and ethical processes? It is worth noting that with over one thousand developers, Debian is the largest free software project and thus not simply sitting on the margins. Furthermore, each project has its own peculiar idiosyncrasies, so it is impossible to use any one project to generalize about all of them. If the processes I discussed here exist on a spec- trum, Debian undoubtedly resides on one end by virtue of its articulation of strong moral commitments whereas others, such as the Linux kernel project, steer clear from explicit moral language.

But other endeavors evince many of the elements explored here. Every large project is dynamic, and has had to deal with the problems of trust and scalability. Most of the large ones have had to routinize, like Debian, by devising formal procedures for entry that require prospective members to undergo mentorship and training. Many medium- to large-size projects have drafted key documents that de ne their goals and vision. In the case of Debian, they have formalized this into the Social Contract. Similar to developers who labor in distinct places, in other free software projects to large technology  rms, Debian developers also seek to strike a balance be- tween individually initiated decision making and vertical authority, yielding to the latter to some quali ed degree, even if clearly preferring the former. The ways in which this balance is reached—when and if it is—never follow a predictable, unitary path, although the general attempt is a crucial conduit for articulating and embodying this commitment.

