# EPILOGUE
## How to Proliferate Distinctions, Not Destroy Them
••

In 2006, Time magazine crowned social media and “you” as the person of the year. Typical of many mainstream media representations, Time not only latched on to the moniker Web 2.0 but celebrated it with breathless hyperbole too:

> It’s a story about community and collaboration on a scale never seen before. It’s about the cosmic compendium of knowledge Wikipedia and the million-channel people’s network YouTube and the online metropolis MySpace. It’s about the many wresting power from the few and helping one another for nothing and how that will not only change the world, but also change the way the world changes. (Gross- man 2006)

This quote treats Wikipedia, YouTube, and Myspace not only as inter- changeable examples of community and collaboration but also as moral solvents with the power to melt away existing power structures. Although the hype may be more pronounced in this piece, the simple con ation of these distinct digital domains is not unique to Time or even other journal- istic pieces; it is simply one example of how Internet technologies between 2005 and the present have been imagined by academics, journalists, policy- makers, and activists.

Starting in 2005, but continuing unabated today, many commentators and critics alike have placed a range of digital phenomenon, including free software, under the umbrella of Web 2.0. This term was  rst coined in 2005 by O’Reilly to differentiate contemporary technologies (wikis, blogs, and embedded videos) from their immediate predecessors, such as email and static Web pages. These second-generation technologies, he claimed, al- lowed for more interactivity,  exibility, and participation than the earlier ones. Since the term’s invention, it has not only become the governing meta- phor by which to understand contemporary Internet technologies and the social practices that cluster around them. It also has been stretched so far and so wide that it now encompasses software (blogs and wikis), corporate platforms (Flickr, Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, and Myspace), projects and nonpro ts (Wikipedia, Debian, and Creative Commons), and collaborative techniques (remixing and crowdsourcing).

There are certainly points of connection to be made between these do- mains, technologies, practices, and projects. Yet this constant con ation ob- scures far more than it reveals. When used in celebratory terms, Web 2.0 puts on equal footing a user who uploads a video on YouTube or a photo on Flickr (corporate-owned, proprietary platforms) and a free software devel- oper or even a Wikipedian who is part of a nonpro t, collective effort. Many academics and journalists who are critical of Web 2.0 often accept the as- sumption smuggled within this discourse—namely, that these disparate phe- nomenon belong in the same analytic frame in the  rst place. “It breaks my heart,” writes one of the  ercest critics of contemporary computer currents, Jaron Lanier (2010, 70), “when I talk to energized young people who idolize the icons of the new digital ideology, like Facebook, Twitter, Wikipedia and free/open/Creative mashups.” Lanier might be less perturbed if he knew that those who embrace F/OSS and Wikipedia are frequently the  ercest critics of the privacy violations and copyright policies of social network platforms like Facebook.

Among other effects, this rampant lumping together obscures the com- plex sociology and history of some digital projects—a surprising omission given that a number of quite prominent citizen media and free software projects, like Indymedia and Debian, were at the forefront of organizing themselves into institutional forms years before the rise of so-called Web 2.0, by 2000 and as early as 1998. It was not simply that most journalists, pundits, and many academics ignored this fact, though. This omission was replaced with a countervailing story that suggested otherwise, alleging that knowledge was being created by forces of mild disorganization whereby individuals, acting in loose coordination with each other, led to novel forms of collaboration. This vision reached prominence for the way it so perfectly meshes with, and thus supports, dominant understandings of freedom, agency, and individualism. There is no better example of this sentiment than the title of Shirky’s enormously popular 2006 book Here Comes Everybody: The Power of Organizing without Organizations. Although many of his observations about digital dynamics are illuminating, and many of the ex- amples he draws on, such as meet-up groups, remain informal, many others that he discusses, such as Wikipedia and Linux, were by 2006, organized, and as such, some type of organization.

These new institutions are not the large slumbering bureaucracies most often associated with governments, the post of ce, or big corporations. In building what are new institutional forms, open-source developers and Wikipedians usually seek to strike a balance between stability and open- ended  exibility. In the process of doing so, many engender particular forms of social value that include mutual aid, transparency, and complex codes for collaboration along with other ethical precepts that help guide techni- cal production. In the case of Debian—explored in detail in this book—its policies, direction, and imperatives are decided by a collective that not only creates software but also has been innovative, quite successfully so, in terms of institution building. Just as signi cant is the fact that free software licens- ing ensures that the fruits of labor are equally available to all—a condition unmet by many forms of crowdsourced labor, much less ones that unfold on corporate and cloud-based platforms, such as Flickr, where collaboration is said to  ourish, and yet where users can lose access to their data when and if the company folds or takes down a service.

The politics of F/OSS, narrowly de ned though they may be, are obfus- cated and severely distorted when they are lumped in with Web 2.0. When the organizational sociologies of these projects are ignored, it is far easier to collapse them into the category of more informal, less coordinated forms of production, thereby obscuring how these distinct forms of production ethi- cally, politically, and economically function. “Observing participation with- out any guide to its diversity,” argues Adam Fish and his colleagues (2011, 160), “is like watching birds with no sense of what distinguishes them other than that they  y and squawk (when of course, many do neither).” In recent times, scholars have started to unearth as well as describe the organizational dynamics at play with free software (Kelty 2008), Wikipedia (Fuster Morell 2010; O’Neil 2009; Reagle 2010), and hacker anticapitalist technology col- lectives (Anderson 2009; Juris 2008; Milberry 2009), and insist on analyti- cally disaggregating the lumping that is so common when analyzing digital media (Gillespie 2010; Fish et al. 2011).1

Many, however, continue to con ate different digital domains. For in- stance, despite the astounding plurality exhibited by digital activism, it is treated in starkly singular terms. Take, say, the widely circulated (and much discussed) critique of the politics of digital media in a 2010 New Yorker article titled “Small Change: Why the Revolution Will Not Be Tweeted,” where author Malcolm Gladwell (2010) notes, “the evangelists of social media seem to believe that [ . . . ] signing up for a donor registry in Silicon Valley today is activism in the same sense as sitting at a segregated lunch counter in Greensboro in 1960.” I share Gladwell’s deep skepticism of the hype that envelops mainstream understandings of many social networking platforms like Twitter and Facebook. I think it is imperative to discuss the limits of activism based on weak social ties and the security risks in us- ing corporate platforms. Yet his critique only works by way of silencing a number of historical and contemporary examples. Digital interaction and activism are not, as Gladwell suggests, inherently grounded in weak ties but also can be the basis for socially deep ties, such as is the case for much of F/OSS production—a domain that has fundamentally altered the politics of access and intellectual property. Digital media has also played a critical role in fomenting and helping sustain more traditional social movements like the counterglobalization protests (Bennett 2003; Juris 2008). To take a more recent case, the digital entity Anonymous, part digital direct action, part hu- man rights technology activism, and part performance spectacle, while quite organizationally  exible, is perhaps one of the most extensive movements to have arisen almost directly from certain quarters of the Internet (Coleman 2012a). Instead of differentiating between types and forms of digital activ- ism, Gladwell, like so many, paints digital activism in starkly singular terms, in the process relegating existing forms that do not conform to “slacktiv- ism” into the dustbin of history, and unable to distinguish in the most basic ways between forms of activism with distinct roots, forms of organization, and effects.

Attention to these basic, sometimes-fundamental differences in digital sociality and activism can help foster greater understanding of what digital politics mean along with the range of possibilities they might have to of- fer and their limits. We must be ruthless in how we differentiate the social dynamics and formats of digital activism in order to more fully glean the public as well as political lessons afforded by these worlds.

In the end, it is worth taking a cue from the world of free software in two regards. It is, for one, a domain where developers balance forms of social- ity and forces often treated as mutually exclusive: individualism and social cooperation, utility and artistry, altruism and self-interest, organization and disorganization, populism and elitism, and especially individualism and so- cial cooperation. Hackers who are seen (and at times portray themselves) as quintessentially individualistic often live this individualism through remark- ably cooperative channels. This should not make us question the reality of individualism, which is also culturally incarnated, but instead encourage us to examine the assumption that this individualism precludes cooperation. In fact, individualism frequently results in more cooperation, on a larger scale than would otherwise exist. Second, what makes these projects so in- teresting is not how they engender democracy writ large, or fundamentally change the warp and woof of economic and social structures, but that col- laborators make technology at the same time that they experiment in the making of a social commonwealth; it is there where the hard work of free- dom is practiced.