# PART I
## HISTORIES
••

> While we read history we make history. —George William Curtis, The Call of Freedom


The next two chapters are general in their scope, meant to introduce read- ers to the world of free software, and do so from two related although distinct vantage points, both historically informed. Chapter 1, as mentioned above, describes a typical life history compiled from over  fty in-person interviews along with twenty email and/or Internet Relay Chat (IRC) in- terviews. It portrays everyday life and historical transformation as many experience it: in a mundane register, and without the awareness that we are making or are part of history. What it seeks to show is how hackers become hackers slowly over time and through a range of varied activities. This pro- cess, though experienced in quotidian ways, is ultimately a historical affair, for the hackers of yesteryear are not quite the same as those of today, despite crucial continuities. The  rst chapter tracks some of the changes within free software and also provides basic sociological data about free software de- velopers: where they learned to program, where they work, and how they interact with other developers.


Chapter 2 turns away from personal accounts to tell a more global story. It traces two distinct but overlapping legal trajectories and their eventual clash. During the same period in which intellectual property law assumed tremendous and global regulatory power, free software also rose to promi- nence, eventually providing one of the most robust challenges ever to intel- lectual property laws. The legal alternatives made and supported by free software did not always follow from politically motivated action, but rather from the experiences involved in the production of free software. These ex- periences were formative, leading a generation of hackers to become astute legal thinkers and producers—knowledge that was in turn eventually mar- shaled for political protest against the current intellectual property regime.
Before turning to these two chapters, it is worth highlighting how histor- ical representation is a delicate play of fabrications, or stated a little more eloquently by Voltaire in his short story “Jeannot et Colin, “fables agreed upon.” By fable, I don’t mean false, yet it is imperative to acknowledge the constructed nature of the accounts. Choices have to be made about what to include, what to exclude, and most important, how to include them. For the life history chapter, I have chosen stories, elements, and events that I hope faithfully capture the zeitgeist of becoming a free software hacker, ending with one of the most memorable hacker events: the hacker confer- ence. The subsequent chapter, by examining the dual character of our age, whereby we are subject to an omnipresent legal system and also have at our disposal a vibrant set of legal alternatives, is meant to inspire a para- doxical degree of hope and despair, thereby contributing, in its reading, to the making of history.

